All right, so continuing from where we left off in the last lesson, we're going to now look at how
to implement the ability to sum up the salaries of all of these employees again, but this time obviously
using the Streams API.
So first thing will do.
Let's go ahead and select this little test code that we were playing with in the last lesson.
We don't need this anymore.
So I'm just selecting it and I'm going to delete it with a command delete and I'll get rid of some of
these empty spaces as well.
All right.
And then we'll uncomment the original code, and let's just run that again just to make sure that that's
good.
OK, cool.
So there's all of our people.
All right.
So we want to sum up their salaries.
So looking at this list here.
So we know that this is now technically a list of AI employees, right?
The interface of employee.
The reason we know that is because this this line thirty six right here is mapping, which you can think
of mapping as basically converting right.
It's it's mapping the individual text strings of each of these lines from text by calling the Create
employee method, which is taking the text as an input and then spitting out a an instance of an AI
employee.
Right.
And then each of those AI employees is going and is being fed into the for each method, which in turn
is calling print line.
And by the way, I mean, just quick refresher here.
The print line, when we're passing in and object to the print line, you know that what's actually
happening there is that that objects to string method is getting called.
And that's why this is printing out the way that it is.
So if we wanted to change this, we could go into the to string method of the employee class and change
it, right?
Just a quick refresher there on how that was actually working.
I didn't stated explicitly in the last lesson or so.
All right.
So we've got these AI employees here, and we want to sum up the salaries of them.
So how can we do that with with the with the streams API?
Well, one thing I'm going to kind of jump ahead.
I'm going to kind of skip ahead a minute and just let you know right now that the Streams API actually
has a function that can sum a stream of numbers.
So if you have numbers such as integers, for example, which is what our salaries happen to be modeled
as, if you have a stream of integers, you can pass that stream of integers into this some function
of the Streams API, and it will sum them all up for you.
So what we need to do if we want to make use of that is to figure out how to go from a stream of AI
employees, which is what we have here to a stream of integers.
Can you think of a way to do that using the Streams API?
Why don't you take a moment to think about it?
OK.
So as you know, the map function allows us to convert or transform objects of one type to another type,
or technically it allows us to transform streams of one type two streams of another type.
So however, you want to think about that, right?
So currently, it's converting a stream of strings.
Sorry, that that's so confusing.
I'm just going to say a stream of text, right?
It's converting a stream of text, which are these individual text lines into a stream of AI employee
objects?
Right?
And then those are getting printed out.
That's what it's currently doing.
So we could just add another map function in the pipeline right after that.
Just like this perhaps map.
And what we want to do is to access the.
Get salary method of each of those employee's right, because each of them has a get salary method on
it.
So if we were to just call the get salary method of each of those objects, that would return back just
the salary right now, there's a question of how can we do that?
So I'll be honest with you, when I was preparing this lesson for you, I myself made a mistake and
I'm going to show you the mistake that I made because it's probably a pretty easily made mistake.
And I want you to be aware of it.
So this is what I initially did.
I did employee colon colon.
I use the method reference because technically the get salary method exists on the employee class and
then I called get salary just like so and the Strings API was not happy with me.
And if I hover my cursor here, you'll see.
Let's see, what are we getting here?
No instances of type variables exist so that I employee conforms to employee.
All right.
So what is that thing?
Well, we have to think about this for a moment.
What's coming out of line 36?
Line 36 is returning a stream of eye employee objects.
OK.
Now down here, I'm telling the map function to call the get salary method of the employee class.
So do you can you are you getting a sense for what the issue probably is here?
The the issue has to do with the fact that the objects coming out of Line 36 are are of type I employee,
but I'm telling this second map function to call employee get salary.
I'm not referencing the get salary method declared on the I employee interface.
I'm referencing the get salary method of the employee class.
That's kind of a problem.
All right.
So what I can do is simply reference the get salary method of the employee class.
And then the error goes away.
All right, so this is returning now, a stream of integers.
All right.
And then I mentioned earlier that there is a sum function that can take as input a stream of numbers.
So what I can do now is simply reference that oop.
But hold on a minute.
Where is it?
It's not showing up for me, so I did this on purpose.
The reason it's not showing up is because the sum function is only available when following a preceding
streams API function that deals specifically with numbers.
So this map function here is kind of a generic one size fits all map function to convert vaguely anything
to anything.
However, there is a more specific map function that can map supposedly anything to integers specifically.
And so what we want to do is actually here is actually change this second map function from map to map
to end.
And if you see here, there's actually several of these map to end map to double map to long map multi.
There's a lot of these things, right?
But we'll we'll just go right now with the map to end.
So now if we hover over the map to end, we can see the little Java Dock here and see specifically what
does it return?
And you'll see that it doesn't just return a stream.
It returns an end stream, a stream of integers.
OK.
And because it returns an end to stream, this end stream exposes additional streams API methods that
pertain specifically to handling numbers such as summing integers.
And so now, if we come over here and do a control space, look at that.
We've got access to a some method in.
While we're here real quick, we can take a look.
There's also a max and a few other things as well that we may come back and take a look at later.
But for now, we want to look at this some method here.
Now, if I hover over the same method, we'll see that this method is also a terminal operation, meaning
it is the end of a.
Other streams API pipeline.
And as such, we cannot have both the same method here and the for each method.
And by the way, I'm well aware that I am kind of interchangeably using the terms method and functions
when referring to the pipeline methods or functions here.
Forgive me for that.
I tend to think of them a little bit more as functional as functions most of the time because a lot
of the streams API stuff is really getting heavy, heavy into functional programming.
So, you know, call it what you want.
But so at any rate, we can't do both a thumb and a for each one of them has to go and it's going to
be this for each year.
So let's get rid of that.
And now I need to terminate this sum here with a semicolon.
All right.
But now what can I do with this?
So if we hover over this one more time, the some function or method here we see that it outputs an
integer.
So it just sums up every number that that's getting kind of accumulated in it and then spits out the
sum.
So we need to capture that.
And so what I can do here is the an option command V.
And yeah, I'll just use that, that number, that variable name, their sum.
All right.
And then we can print that out some and let's rerun and let's see what we've got now.
OK, so we've got this number here.
Now notice it's not pretty or anything right, it would still need to be formatted or something, but
we've got that number.
All right now, before we move on with the rest of this lesson, I want to show you one other interesting
thing that I think you should be aware of.
So we had to use the map to end a function here in order to unlock our ability to do something right
to use this sum.
OK.
I want to show you the what would have happened if we had used the map to end function.
But we did not use a method reference that was referring to the I employee interface, and instead we
had referred to the get salary method of just the employee class itself.
I want to show you what would happen there.
OK, so it goes back into error again, but it's going to be a slightly different error now.
So if I hover over this now we're getting a message.
Non static method cannot be referenced from a static context.
So I want to dig in on this a little bit and make sure that you have a general understanding of what's
going on here because there's actually quite a bit of Java magic going on underneath the hood to enable
all of this cool stuff to even work, and it will be helpful for you to get a certain degree of understanding
of it.
So non static method cannot be referenced from a static context.
So what's going on here?
Well, so the method reference on Line 36, which is calling Create Employee, as we know, is returning
a stream of AI employee objects.
Right?
And then on line 37, as it's currently written, we are then trying to call the get salary method of
the employee class.
So let me start off and just tell you, generally speaking, what's happening here is because the stream
of objects that are entering into line 37 are of type I employee.
When Java sees that we are referencing the get salary method of a class that isn't specifically an I
employee.
It assumes that we are trying to call a static method.
However, it knows well and good that the get salary method is not a static method.
OK.
And so we're getting this message here.
Non static method cannot be referenced from a static context.
So the basic rule that's happening here is Java is saying when you have an input in this case to the
map to enter method that is of one type and you are supplying the map to end method with a method reference
to a method that exists on a different data type.
It will assume that the method reference on Line 37 is meant to be a static method reference, even
though it can see clearly that that's not a static method.
Those are just the rules of how Java figures out what you mean when you are supplying it with a method
reference, and it has about four primary rules that it tries to follow to figure out how to map the
data in the subsequent stream into the method reference of the next step in that pipeline.
OK.
And so what we're kind of hitting at here is one of these rules.
Let me try to show you visually what I kind of mean here.
So I'm going to do a little bit of quick drawing here.
OK.
So got my my tablet here.
And basically, what you can kind of envision here is, let's say that we've got a stream of.
Of AI employees, which I will depict as red stick figures.
All right.
All right, so there's our.
Our our AI employees, and I will label them as such, I am employee.
All right.
Well, yeah.
Now they are being fed into let me change the color here they're being fed into.
Actually, let's make that a little smaller.
Now they're being fed into this map to end function here
and the map to end function.
Is referencing the employee get salary method now?
I don't know.
Maybe, maybe I will.
Maybe what I'll do is I will depict the employee get salary method kind of down here in green, maybe.
So let's see.
We've got the.
Employee.
That get.
Salary method.
OK.
And what this method does.
Let me move this over a bit.
OK.
And what this method returns is employees.
Right.
So I'll draw an employee.
So employees are green, eye employees are red.
OK, that's the that's the bottom line there.
All right.
So when we try to pass this stream, oh, I'll even call it a stream here.
A stream of employees when we try to pass that stream of employees into the map to end function.
Map.
To and.
Function.
What's going to happen is Java is going to look at the data type of the incoming stream, which is I
employee.
Which is I employee, right?
And it's going to look at.
The.
Method that our map to ENT function is referring to, which is the employee that gets salary right,
so can kind of.
Kind of like, you know, that's kind of inside of the map to end function here, right?
And it's going to see that the employed I get salary method returns, objects of type employee.
And so it's comparing I employee up here to employee down here.
And it's saying, Oh, these are different types and therefore this method that he wants to call here.
Should be treated as though it's a static method, that's just the rules.
OK, let me show you this.
If we were referencing the I.
Employee, don't get salary.
Method.
Inside of the from within the map to end, you know, from from within the map to end function here.
So instead of having employee that gets salary, we had an employee actually, let's let's have our
dual colons there, right?
Same thing up here.
Dual cones.
All right.
So if we had the employee get salary instead of the employee get salary method reference inside of our
map to end function here, then what would happen is the Streams API would say, OK.
We're calling the get salary method on the employee class and the type of objects that are coming into
our stream are also of Type I employee.
And therefore we should treat this get salary method call as just being an instance method reference
as opposed to a static method reference.
OK.
And so what it's actually going to do in that case is it's going to call the get salary method individually
on each of these objects, right?
Because they are instances, OK?
Whereas if if it's thinking that the get salary method is a static method, though, it's not going
to call a get salary method on the individual instances.
Instead, it's going to try to call a static get salary method.
Do you get the difference here and there is no static get salary method and thus we get this this error.
OK, so Java in the Streams API are really, really trying to be super, super smart to figure out when
we pass in these method references, what should it actually do?
We'll look more at this.
We'll look at a few more examples of the of the method reference calls in subsequent lessons because
there are more rules than just what I'm showing you here.
So if you're not fully catching what I'm what I'm putting down, don't worry about it too much.
You'll get another opportunity to to see what I'm talking about here, OK?
But this is, but this is kind of an interesting thing that Java is doing.
And then there are way more complex scenarios as well for how it can figure out how to map the data
coming from one step in the in the stream to another one.
So we'll look at more of those later.
But I just wanted to take a moment to kind of show you at least a little bit here.
OK, so now you've learned a little bit about why you can't reference the get salary method of the employee
class.
In this case, it's because these objects that are coming out of here are actually of type I employee,
and that makes the Streams API think that it needs to call a static method on get salary because the
employee doesn't match employee.
OK.
So to fix that, we just make it an employee and everything's happy now.
OK, now the other thing I want to address is the fact that while we are getting a sum, the sum of
all the salaries now we are no longer getting to see the printout of the individual employees.
So let's say, for whatever reason, we like seeing that as well, and we don't want to do this kind
of like twice, you know, one where we're printing out the people and then another where we're just
summing up the numbers.
We kind of want to do it all in once with with little to no duplicated code.
How can we do that?
Well, one way we could do it would be to just modify this a little bit.
Now this primary approach that I can think of would involve us stepping back from using a method reference
and going back towards just using a lambda expression, because that way we can type a little bit of
code.
So let me show you what I mean here.
So do you want to take a moment to try to think of how you could change this line?
37 here to not use a method reference and instead just use a lambda expression to do the equivalent
of this, but also allow you to print out the individual people here.
You want to take a moment to try to figure that out.
All right.
So hopefully, you tried that, if not, no worries.
So I'm going to show you a way that I can think to do this.
All right.
So I'll just delete that.
And so with the lambda expression, I'm going to refer to the individual objects that are coming out
of this previous stream here.
The previous step in the stream here or in the pipeline here.
And those are my employees.
So I'm just going to refer to them as E for employee.
And then I'll need my arrow here.
Now, if I was only going to just return when things like E. get salary, for example, which I can
absolutely do, then I'm done right here.
However, that isn't all I want to do.
I actually want to be able to print out a reference to them as well.
And so I want to be able to do like two statements here.
And because I want that, I'm going to need curly braces like because I want to supply a code block
right?
A block of code.
And we learned before that a block of code is usually multiple lines, two or more lines of code statements
or expressions that are surrounded by curly braces.
So any time you want to have a block of code, you need the curly braces.
And so here are my curly braces here, and I'll hit enter.
And so now what I can do is first, just print the employee.
That print line E!
Right?
Just like that.
And then the next bit I can do is simply refer to the value that I want to return from this basically
anonymous method, this lambda expression, right?
And so I want the salary so I can just say e get salary.
There we go.
So, yeah, it's pretty much just, you know, old school old fashioned the old fashioned way that we
have already, that we already know how to code right?
So you can always kind of revert back to kind of a mixed a mixed form of coding here, even within the
Streams API.
Now I would be careful.
I wouldn't have, you know, like 20, 30, 40 lines of code inside of here to do this, though I would
not do that.
Now one thing I could do if, let's say, I wanted to do a lot more than just these two lines here.
One thing I could consider doing, I suppose, would be to create another method and I'll call it public
static, and it's going to return an integer.
And let's see.
This method is going to show employee and get salary.
And it's going to take as an input and I employee.
And now what it's going to do is.
Everything I'm doing right here.
Like so, so now what I could consider doing is to select all of that.
Get rid of that.
And now watch this.
So what I can do now is I can actually refer to this new method that does these two steps using a method
reference, actually.
And watch what this looks like.
So to refer to this as a method reference, I need to refer to the class that it lives in, which is
this class here, the street.
I named it stream's stuff, right?
So if I just start typing, there's stream stuff.
And if I look through this list, look at that.
There's the method reference as an option right there.
And voila!
Now I can, you know, just do a one liner here because really, all I've done is this extract out the
the more complex stuff that it's doing down here.
OK, so you can make your own method references really easily.
And in this particular case, it is a static reference.
And the reason it's a static reference is because two things.
First off, I have a static method here as the method.
And then the Java System and Streams API are recognizing that the input here is of Type II employee,
which is exactly what's coming out of the stream from Line thirty six.
So those data types are matching.
And so it's all nice and happy.
So let's run this and confirm.
Yeah, look at that.
So we get our we get our people printed out still.
And we get our son as well, and we still have a really nice, readable pipeline here for where we're
using our Streams API.
So now you've seen a few ways that we could do this.
All right.
So that's going to wrap up this lesson where we've just kind of re-implemented most of the functionality
that we had before.
Obviously, we did not bother to format this integer that could be done, but there's nothing streams
API related to that.
That would just be us taking this number and then using a number format or to format that number to
our liking.
I will leave that as an exercise to you.
Other than that, though, will continue forward with learning other really awesome tricks that we can
do with the Streams API in the subsequent lesson.
So I will see you in the next one.